You were talking about that being the only form of
entertainment. Can you think of any others that
might have gone on that the boys did or the faculty
amused themselves with? Well, of course, the
faculty played bridge, or whist at that time it was
called, and had formal dances using the missile. I
mean, the... Shirley... for the faculty. The
students were going to have a dance. They used the
mess hall.
Now, you were single for how long there? Well, I was
single all along then. I came back here single
after the war. I didn't marry until 21. Did the
single faculty members ever date any of the girls
in Bryan?
Or did they have time to get out? Oh, my goodness.
Why, man? Dear human. Oh, well, I know that, but I
was just wondering if that's where they went to
brine. Sure, well, there was a trotter line. Were
there lots of single girls in brine then? Well, I
would say there were plenty for the faculty. Some
of them married the faculty men, some of them
married students. Some of those girls in brine
married students, and some did marry tall.
Well, I don't know. None of this stuff I'm telling
you is of any value. You ask a question that they
have dances. Yes, the men, we'd have a dance at the
Shirley,
and we'd go down, get our dates and walk them down to
the trolley line and rack them out on the trolley.
11.30, we'd take them back. Then we'd walk home.
All the way from Bryan? Sure. It was about, what,
six miles? Five. Five. Take about? About an hour
and a half. About an hour and a half. Yeah. But you
know, all the ladies, after having a dance with the
beautiful lady, you could walk ten miles. So you
all get back then? 1, 2 o'clock the next morning.
Oh, yes. These dances were usually, what, on a
Saturday night? Oh, yes. They'd be on a Saturday
night. I see. Now, later on, we began to have dances
in the gymnasium. I don't know how much you got on
Charlie Moran. Very little. Charlie Moran's one
of the great men that's ever been to this
institution.
What do you remember about him? Everything good.
Everything good. Could you tell us a little bit
about it? Well, I came here, and Charlie, his wife,
and his son, Charles Jr., was living upstairs over
the, over the Shirley. And Charlie participated
in our after supper boxing contest. Oh now, you all
boxed after supper? Oh yes. I see. Where did you all
box? Where did this take place? In the Shirley? Oh
no, no. Outdoors or if it's in some of the rooms in
the Shirley Annex. I saw John Griswold, a
professor of veterinary, no, animal husbandry,
hit Si Evans on the chin and dropped him behind the
trunk, and we had to almost tear the building down
to get Si out the back of the trunk.
Oh, my goodness. How often did this take place?
Every evening? It could be every evening. There
was no set. There was just nothing set about it. Did
everybody participate? Oh, no. No, no. There were
a bunch of fellas that were... more lace on their
pants that wouldn't participate. But Charlie
would, and he'd get in there, and Charlie'd get
mad, and that was fun, to haul up and suck him and
make him mad.
But getting mad didn't last. It was fun to wrap one
around his ear, You say that Coach Moran
participated. Was he a good boxer? Fair. None of
them were going to challenge
Ed Hamlin. Neither or none of them would have
challenged Ed Hamlin.
They didn't have, when I came here, football was
played on the drill field. It was. And they passed
the hat to get any funds that was, to get men.
Baseball was played on the drill field. They
passed the hat. Now this is the drill field you're
talking about, the one that's now in front of the
MSC? Yeah. Okay. Now, in the summer of 1911,
a boy by the name of Kyle, who was on the board of
directors, an uncle to E.J. Kyle,
arranged for a bit of land to be set aside
for the athletic department. Up until that time,
they had not had an athletic director. Charlie was
the first athletic director. Now this Kyle you
spoke of, do you remember his initials? Dr. Allen
Kyle. I see. And where was he? He was Houston. He was
in Houston. Do you remember anything else about
him? What he did for a living? He was a doctor. Oh, he
was an M.D. I see. Okay, go ahead. Well,
They have a football game, and it rained. The drill
field wasn't fit to drill on for quite a while. So in
the interim, until they got this field that Kyle
had set out, they moved around the corner about
where those tennis courts are, If you know, as you
go around the corner from MSC, heading down toward
the... There are a bunch of tennis courts over
there. It's behind. It's back of Kyle Field. No,
it's this way. Now, wait a minute. I'll take it
back. They've got an athletic dormitory going in
there now. Okay, I know what you're talking about.
All right. That used to be... You see... I'm behind
you. I'm out of date. But that was... And they set
that out to play football on. I see. And the fall of
1911, they played football there. Charlie, by
midnight requisitioning,
begging, borrowing, stealing, and everything
possible, got together enough stuff to enclose
This athletic field that was set out by members of
the board of directors under the instance of Dr.
Kyle. Now, you're talking about not where the
tennis courts are, but now we're talking about the
new place. I'm talking about Kyle Field. That area
right there. We're inside of Kyle Field now. Now,
that was not originally college land? Oh, yes. It
was old college land, but it was set aside. it was
part of the agronomy, a test lab. He took it away
from them and gave it to the athletic department. I
see. Since he was on the board of directors, he
could do this. Oh yes, oh yes. And don't get the idea
that E.J. Kyle had anything to do with this,
although in 1925, after his uncle died, he went to
the board of directors and asked the board of
directors to say that Kyle Field was named for him.
And they did. And they did. So it is named for him.
No. In a way. No. Well, I understand the point, but
yeah, I see what he did. All right. Now,
Charlie called that area Kyle Field. But, as I
said, by every way he could do it. He didn't have any
money. Use of students for labor, faculty members
for labor, all of it shelled out money. I'd give
him, of course, I'd give him something down to as
much as 50 cents.
And he'd take up a collection of something. He
needed something, and the fellow... He just
passed the hat. The hat, yeah. And with his energy
and hard work of his own, they built a gymnasium
that
had, believe it or not, hot and running water and a
place to play basketball. My goodness. It's a good
building. It's well put together. It's a double
floor deal. Mm-hmm. And
the
faculty then moved their dancers from the Shirley
down there. We just had to walk another half mile,
that's all. It didn't make any difference in those
days. And
the students still continue. When they had
Thanksgiving and Easter and the final, or in the
domes or in the missiles.
But Charlie, in the fall of 1912, now you're going
to have to check these dates. I'm not sure about
this date. I think in the fall of 1912, he brought
Leo Betray in, who was an All-American football
player from Chicago and All-American
basketball, I think. But at any rate, he was a
basketball player. He may not have been an
All-American. to help him as a coach they had no
basketball team so ron hanson a student here had
played basketball in houston
and they tagged him for captain he had some
experience and they organized a basketball team
But they had nobody to play until, oh, I reckon, I
guess Bill was the first intercollegiate they
played. There again, you'd have to check the
figures on it because. But in order for the boys to
have some practice, a bunch of the younger
instructors would organize them a basketball
team and played them. I see. And most of them, as I
told, where are you from? Corpus Christi. Well,
there was a Baptist preacher in Galveston that was
one of the most famous Baptist preachers in Texas.
And I told Bailey Stone that when I came here, he
tried to take my place off the Best Man Athletic
Club's basketball team, but he couldn't. He
wasn't bloodthirsty enough. Because you take a
move there, you have a fellow playing basketball,
and he's supposed to have some skin places. coming
off and a little blood flowing. Well, this bunch of
instructors had been taught, they had come up
under that rough little way of playing. Well, in
1920 they changed all that, and even today it's
rough now. But if you'd have left the rules like
they were back there, there would have been mayhem
on every game. Basketball was a contact sport
then? Oh, yes.
You get the ball, I take it away from you. I see.
There weren't any fouls then, huh? Yes, there were
fouls, but if you had that ball and I got my hand on
it, you and I would have a wrestling match, and that
was not a foul. I see. And? And you played on this
team for how long? Well, this is just this year,
that one year. That one year. Because of the fact
that the students, after that, they had plenty of
competition. And they had plenty of substitutes
and so on. But the faculty helped make the
basketball team in, I think it was 1912. Remember
anything else about Charlie Moran? And Charlie,
as I said, was a baseball coach.
And he did not attempt to coach baseball. D.
Tracher did that. Charlie coached baseball, and
he had a good baseball team. So he had football and
baseball. Yeah. And about 1913, I guess it was,
maybe 14, I don't remember, A&M played the
University of Texas two or three times, the ground
up with them. And the University of Texas
complained that Charlie Moran was coaching dirty
football, and they wouldn't play A&M anymore
until they got rid of Charlie Moran. And A&M
College got rid of one of the best coaches they ever
had. He was fired here? Yeah, he was fired. Do you
know where he went? College, and I never saw
Charlie anymore until A&M Beach Center College in
Christmas of 21-22 in Dallas. And I just married. I
took my wife over to that dressing room, and she is
very, very timid and sensitive, but I dragged her
in that room to see Charlie, and these men had
undershirts and so on, and She'd be blushed all
over, but she met Charlie Moran. It was the only
time she ever met him. I saw Charlie a couple more
times after that. Charlie got up off the bed and
quit cussing and walked over and put his arm around
her and kissed her. That scared her.
Well, he was, but he made the athletic department.
Sounds like he built it almost single-handedly.
He did, he did. You can't say anything against
Charlie for me.
That dirty playing that the university hollered
was a case of pot calling the kettle black.
And where the dirty playing has been, the
university has done more than they shall. And if
A&M violates the rules of today, the
interscholastic rules, collegiate rules today,
the least bit, we get censured. The University of
Texas busts them a little wide open, come in and go
in, and nobody says anything.
Am I prejudiced? Yes, I'm prejudiced. That's not
what you mean. All right, now I don't see where they
are at either. Coming back here, Perea, It was just
at the interim, and Grisel came in. Grisel had a
doctor's degree in education, and he came here. He
was teaching in Navasota as superintendent
of the schools. They brought him here,
and he came in with a lot of friction from top to
bottom.
with not so much from the students as from the
faculty. And he gave here and didn't give there,
and he finally worked that out until
things were very, worked out very nicely. And he
begun to build the institution as an educational
institution. And he left here in 26, 25, to go to
Oklahoma, and taking his place was Walton. Walton
was another great man.
I had a man
tell me when I was in Amarillo, we're going to have
to get rid of Walton. I said, what's the matter?
We want so-and-so to be, him to hire so-and-so, and
he won't do it. I turned to this man and I said, you
want to congratulate the state of Texas on having a
man as president of this institution that puts
principle above politics? The fellow looked at me
and he said, I guess you're right. But he didn't
quit. They kept nibbling at him because he would
not. Hire certain individuals.
Apologies.
. . .
And
he was one of the strong men. A lot of folks didn't
like him. You go down there and go in his office, and
he might run you out and just climb all over you. I
never had Gibb do that to me. The reason is, if I went
in to ask Gibb for a favor, I had a whole lot more
bricks in my pocket than he had in his. I knew what I
wanted, why I wanted, what it was going to cost, and
everything about it. Most of these folks that went
in and asked for appropriations from him really
hadn't done
their midnight oil work. And he would know more
about what they wanted than they did, and he'd come
and run them out and tell them not to come back until
they knew what they wanted.
And I found a gib by Jimenez. If he said yes, he meant
yes. And that's something that in places of that
type is rather unusual.
You thought then that he was very fair and honest?
very have you gotten any different ideas no no i
think there's some people i've run into people who
didn't like him but purely on personality not on
anything that is it he he'd run him out of his office
i mean run him out Get out. Get out. Get out. I did
have one comment that Gibb really created the
Department of Chemical Engineering. Who did?
Gibb Gilchrist. He did more to start it. No. No? No.
Gibb Gilchrist did what had been promised. By who?
Bazell. Bazell? And that is to separate the
Department of Chemical Engineering from the
Department of Chemistry. And
when I went into the Extension Service, that's the
first thing that was done.
And the fellow that they brought in here was a
fellow by the name of
Ruth.
It was not a clean-cut schism. They quit calling it
the Department of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering and were calling it the Department of
Chemistry and the Department of Chemical
Engineering, but it was still under Hedges.
And Ruth got the notion that he was the last word in
the operation of the Department of Chemical
Engineering. And Hedges didn't have that idea.
real quick.
And they brought John Lindsey in. If you've talked
to John Lindsey, who was head of the Department of
Chemical Engineering, he came here, I would say,
in 37. Could you tell us a little bit about C.C.
Hedges? Who? C.C. Hedges. Could you tell us a
little bit about him? He has kind of an interesting
reputation.
There again, you're talking to a fellow that
thinks Hedges is handed down from heaven.
Do you think he was a good administrator there?
Yes, he was, but he was not amenable to,
you might say, give and take. Hedges came here in
the fall 1912, I guess. No.
Could have been. Yeah. As professor of
agricultural chemistry and organic. And they
fired G.S. Fraps at that time out of the
department, put him back on an experiment station
to stay.
And what are you grinning about? Fraps is one of my
favorites. Go ahead. I've been reading about him.
I never met the man, don't know him. He was long gone
by the time I ever arrived, but I read a lot of his
stuff, and he's kind of an interesting person. Do
you know anybody that liked him? I haven't met
anybody that liked him, but he wrote
prolifically. And 50% of them should have stayed
in the... typewriter. It may well be. I'm not a
chemist, but I've been going through a lot of stuff
and just wrote and wrote and wrote forever and I was
just wondering what kind of a man he was. A
self-made son of a bitch. Take that off of this.
It's kind of like the old story that some of us are
born bastards and some of us make it meritorious.
You take that off of this. Okay, I will. But Hedges,
I told you that Blake gave me a bunch of bologna, why
I should stay. Well, he gave Hedges the same stuff.
Hedges told me, I said, well, I went through that,
too. But he was made head of the department, and
Blake left the following year, in 13. Hedges was
made head of the department.
He was a perfectionist, I guess I would like to use
that word, perfectionist, and couldn't tolerate
sloppy
work. And as a result, there were a lot of fellows
that didn't like Hedges.
I
came back in 1919 as head of the department of
chemical engineering, the division of chemical
engineering.
He gave me almost as near as he ever gave anybody
free hand to do as I pleased.
And he had a stiff leg. I could have killed him for
that.
He fell
on the stairway and sprained his knee. I helped
pick him up, put him in a car, and told him to take him
to the hotel. You know what that sucker did? The
fellow started off and he said, stop. He got out of
the car and came on back with that knee. in the shape
it was, in a horrible shape. That night, I put a
towel, it's not a hot towel, I just took a wet towel,
warm, put it around his leg, and I said, you leave it
there until morning. I said, I'm going to sweat
that knee down. I said, that rag is not hot. It'll
get warm from the fever in your knee.
Next morning, that rag was on the floor. Said it got
too hot. He came back here and went to a doctor, and
the doctor drew the water off of the knee, and that
was it. So he had a stiff knee. But, and he was a
firecracker. In a way, he'd fly off the handle real
quick.
But Harold Brayton and I didn't pay any attention
to it. Just let him blow. Other people couldn't
tolerate that. So I imagine you have a lot of people
that didn't care much for Hedges. That's
interesting to get both sides' personality,
though.
I thought well and all of him. And, well, personal
things come in there, lots of them. By the way,
Bolton taught me physics in Mississippi A&M.
Surprising how many people from Mississippi A&M
showed up here. Well, you take, Cornell was from
Mississippi. He was from Starkville. Harrington
was from Starkville.
Cornell went from here to Oklahoma.
During that period,
I would say at one time we had 20% of the younger
staff of the Mississippi A&M. I wonder why. Well,
there was Bolton and Harrington.
They knew the men. They didn't know the others. And
Mississippi, at that time, Mississippi A&M,
was one of the leading Southern colleges. They
faded. I thought of picking it up again. They've
become what now, Mississippi State? Yeah, it's
Mississippi State.
But as I said, Bolton, you'd probably get a better,
as good a picture from others as you will from me,
and we was taking time then. Tom Harrington
graduated from engineering in 1923. And we got him
a job in Texas Company. In 24, I believe it was, he
showed up here. He had quit, and he wanted to teach.
That's what he wanted to do, he wanted to teach. So
we put him on. and he finally wound up, as you see
here, president of the institution. And Tom did a
good work.
Tom was not, was there in the beginning of the
explosion and
was not fully Didn't fully use it, but Earl Rudder
took full use of the explosion. That's financial.
You take, Earl Rudder got a hundred million
dollars. Well, you take a hundred million dollars
and drop it on the campus at A&M College and
something's going to yield. And since that time, I
imagine that the university, the university has
gotten a neighborhood of 200, get us a thousand, I
mean a million. right in the neighborhood of 200
million dollars from the government. And that, in
all, in all payments. There may be more. But you
take that amount of money and put it in a little
community like this, something's going to give.
And you've got these high-rise buildings there
that originally didn't have money enough to make a
low-rise building there.
You see? It's really grown to the extent that at one
time, about a year and a half ago, we had more
buildings, we had more money in buildings under
construction than the campus was worth in 1950.
Oh, yes. Oh, my Lord, yes. In 1914,
they were figuring on giving it away and moving the
college up between Dallas and Fort Worth. I didn't
know that. Who was the instigator of this? I don't
remember. Do you remember the Old Main fire? Do you
remember the Old Main fire? Oh, yes. When it burned
down. Do you know anything about the story of that
fire? Do you have any idea why it burned or maybe who
burned it if it wasn't intentional? Well,
anything that I would say other than what you know
would be just supposition because I don't know. I
don't think anybody does.
It's...
It's a mean thing, but as I said, I wouldn't want to
even speculate at all, because I will say this. In
fact, in the early days, there were no women
working on the campus. To put stenographers on the
campus would put temptation in the minds of the
students, and that couldn't be done. In 19, oh, I
guess 1912, the
Experiment
Station wanted a, the
college library had a woman assistant librarian,
who later became Mrs. W.H. Thomas. a the uh
experiment station had a woman librarian who also
did a little writing for harrington and younger
but officially the wall stenographers were men
well the name of uh spence nagle had a
stenographer, a man, that lived upstairs,
anti-Godlin down the hall from me.
One night, door opened, he came there and he said, I
said, what are you doing in here, Jeffrey? He says,
I think there's a fire somewhere.
I threw, hit the floor running. I said, where?
again. Follow me, guy, follow me." Well, then his
bed was blazing. I picked it up and threw it out the
window and gave him a boot. I said, next time you
stay sober. But that wasn't, at that time Jeffrey
didn't do that. And they started to investigate.
Now this can't be documented because it's just
simply, it's not hearsay and yet it's Well, go
ahead. It actually occurred when the board of
directors were very unhappy. They hadn't been
able to get a stenographer to take the testimony.
And Spence said, well, I've got a stenographer to
take the testimony. He sent for Jeffrey. Jeffrey
came in and was sort of like this, and what you want
the Board of Directors chairman, I can't think of
his name,
said, can you take dictation of this testimony? He
said, let her roll, guy, let her roll. And that is
when they got the testimony they got with Jeffrey
Ticket. Now, he lasted here a couple of years. Oh,
about a year. I named him off, and last time he was
president of the bank. He's done very well. He quit
drinking, and he's done very
well. Well, let's say I got your career up to 1935,
and you went into the extension service. Could you
tell us about that if you've got time to? You know,
that's now, we're getting over into Baron
Moonshousen's work. Who's that? The world's
greatest fibber. Oh, okay.
As I said, I was very unhappy.
I couldn't get students jobs after four years.
And Director Martin of the Extension Service
conceived the idea that if they would build
community centers out in the country from town
that were self-supporting, that it would help
the
agriculture of the state.
And, oh, just as a hobby, I'd been tanning lots of
leather.
And he came in and asked me if I could teach farmers
to tan leather. I said, sure, if they'll do it. I
said, a lot of work to it. He said, folks, we're not
worrying about work now. They want to submit to
goods.
Well, I don't know whether I did right or wrong. My
wife never did like it, but she tolerated it. I went
over to the extension service, had a pretty nice
raise in pay,
and started off as a leather specialist, teaching
writing and teaching farmers to turn leather. Tau
hide sold for 25 cents, opossum skin for 35.
And I've got some leather out there in the garage
now that was built, that I was made in 1936. 1937.
That leather
is as good as any leather you ever saw.
And we made, I helped tan and directed the tanning
of over 200,000 hides. And these are car hides, not
skins. We don't count skins. I think some of the
romantic
phase is in the skins. Women buy those tan skins and
made themselves with fur coats. Yeah, lots of them
made. I used to have to, they'd bring them to me, and
they just didn't wear but a sack. And I'd haul up and
gather them and show them how to gather them. And
they'd wind up with a coat that would fit just like
his, just about as good as the one he'd buy. But
Martin, and in addition to that,
he started in, not only that, he directed me to see
what I could do about making, improving quality of
syrup.
And I'll guarantee you that I can take sorghum
syrup and make you think it's ribbon cane. And it's
easily done.
Lord knows how much syrup I have made and directed.
And I'm still getting letters from folks wanting
to know how to make syrup.
Did you ever do any work for the corn products
company in there? No. I don't know.
O.B. died about 36 or 37,
and H.H. Williamson went into the job. Bill didn't
see any, oh by the way, these, we made the community
centers where the farmers would themselves do all
the work and yet then get the benefit from it.
There's one of those over here in Houston County.
There were two or three of those around. And they
functioned in the way that they were supposed to.
Farmers by Jimenez would turn the leather there
and wind up with hides and leather goods that they
could never have bought. Make them themselves.
Down here is a human interest story. Okay.